add(raw  RFC): 34/WAKU2-PEER-EXCHANGE (#515)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/34/README.md

The main purpose of this protocol is providing resource restricted devices with peers.

# Background and Motivation

Resource restricted devices may not feasibly be able to take part in distributed random sampling ambient peer discovery protocols such as [33/WAKU2-DISCV5](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/33/).
The Waku peer discovery protocol specified in this document allows resource restricted devices to request a list of peers from a (stronger) peer.
Network parameters necessary to connect to this stronger peer can, for instance, be learned from a static bootstrapping method.
The advantage of using Waku peer exchange to discover new peers over simply adding static bootstrap peers to the peer list is a more even load distribution.
If a lot of (resource restricted) nodes would use static bootstrap nodes as relay or store nodes, the load on these would be very high.
Heavily used static nodes also add a centralized element. Downtime of such a node might significantly impact the network.

However, the resource efficiency of this protocol comes at an anonymity cost, which is explained in the [Security/Privacy Considerations](#securityprivacy-considerations) section.

> This protocol SHOULD only be used if [33/WAKU2-DISCV5](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/33/) is infeasible.

Reviewer: Not sure how much of an issue this is, but doing this exposes "resource restricted devices" in the network

Author: Yes. I should mention that :).

# Theory and Protocol Semantics

The peer exchange protocol specified in this document is a simple request-response protocol.
As Figure 1 illustrates, the requesting node sends a request to a peer, which acts as the responder.

> The responder replies with a list of [multiaddresses](https://docs.libp2p.io/concepts/addressing/).

Reviewer: Ideally we would use a Signed Peer Record, but I understand this wouldn't be compatible with discv5

But we should at least include the PeerId (which can be extracted from the ENR)

Author: I will look into this.
It should be in line with the [StrictNoSign Policy](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/phase0/p2p-interface.md#why-are-we-using-the-strictnosign-signature-policy).
Also have to check discv5 ENRs regarding this.

Reviewer 2: [Waku ENR](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/31/) payload is derived from [EIP-778](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-778).

It contains a `signature`of1 the content, signed by the public key encoded in the `secp256k1` field (signature is defined by identity scheme specified in `id` field).

Do we need a similar mechanism for this protocol? Should we simply return the ENRs to include this security feature?

[EIP-778](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-778) does not specify why the signature is provided. After all, if the details are incorrect then connection would just failed because remote peer id must back the public key in the ENR.

Reviewer: > StrictNoSign Policy.

This only applies to gossipsub to avoid linking a message to it's originator
Here, a peer is expected to announce him himself on the network, so we already know he is the originator of this data

Author: Yes. I was looking for implications I might have missed :sweat_smile: . Did not find any problems so far.
I'm switching to ENRs in the response.

I'll add your statement to the security section to make that explicit.

Author: Still, ENRs could be used to track peers over multiple "sessions", and maybe used to facilitate some linking attacks.
Ill mention that in security section. I'll look more into that when I continue with the anonymity analysis.

Reviewer: Yes, though this is more a discv5 issue than a PX issue

See https://github.com/status-im/nim-libp2p/issues/727 for PeerId (which is the identity used in the ENR) rotation discussion
(TLDR: we should change peerid when we change IP, which is not trivial to do)

Author: Yes. I remeber the discord convo :).
I touched on possible implications in the security section.

![Figure 1: The responder provides a list of multiaddresses of peers to the requester.](../../../../static/rfcs/34/protocol.svg)

In order to protect its anonymity, the responder MUST NOT provide peers from its actively used peer list as this opens pathways to *Neighbourhood Surveillance* attacks, as described in the
[Security/Privacy Considerations Section](#securityprivacy-considerations).

> The responder SHOULD retrieve a new random set of peers via [33/WAKU2-DISCV5](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/33/).

Reviewer: Kind of an implementation detail, but do you foresee this as being "a DISCV5 request for every incoming PX request", or "a DISCV5 request every X minutes / whatever, and for this duration I reply the same set"?

Author: At the moment, I wanted to leave that open.
I should discuss this in the "implantation suggestions" section.

Its a trade-off between anonymity and efficiency.
Sending the same set of peers to various nodes opens pathways to neighbourhood surveillance.

Reviewer 2: For efficiency purposes, especially in the context of a web app loading, it would be better if the responder retrieves and cache a random set of peers via discv5 first and then deliver some of those peers in the response I suggest we strongly recommended the .

If the responder triggers discv5 upon receiving a request, I am afraid the latency would be too high to be usable in a web app context.

I can see this is also mentioned in the Security section.

I think we should rephrase this to discourage discv5 being trigger upon request and encourage the usage of a cache.

Author: Addressed in 33263c3 while protecting the anonymity properties. I did not thoroughly analyse the implications of reusing peers in response sets yet. But the phrasing now makes caching a SHOULD and reusing exchange peers a MAY.

The responder SHOULD provide a set of peers that has been retrieved using ambient peer discovery methods supporting random sampling, e.g. [33/WAKU2-DISCV5](/spec/33/).
This both protects the responder's anonymity as well as helps distributing load.

To allow for fast responses, responders SHOULD retrieve peers unsolicited (before receiving a query)
and maintain a queue of peers for the purpose of providing them in peer exchange responses.
To get the best anonymity properties with respect to response peer sets, responders SHOULD use each of these peers only once.

To save bandwidth, and as a trade off to anonymity,
responders MAY maintain a larger cache of exchange peers and randomly sample response sets from this local cache.
The size of the cache SHOULD be large enough to allow randomly sampling peer sets that (on average) do not overlap too much.
The responder SHOULD periodically replace the oldest peers in the cache.
This document provides recommended choices for the cache size in the [Implementation Suggestions Section](#implementation-suggestions).

Requesters, in the context of the specified peer exchange protocol, SHOULD be resource restricted devices.

> While any node could technically act as a requester, using the peer exchange protocol comes with two drawbacks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While any node could technically act as a requester, using the peer exchange protocol comes with two drawbacks:
```

* reducing [anonymity](#securityprivacy-considerations)
* causing load on responder nodes

# Wire Format Specification

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

message PeerInfo {
  bytes ENR = 1;
}

message PeerExchangeQuery {
  int numPeers; // number of peers requested
}

message PeerExchangeResponse {
  repeated PeerInfo peerInfos = 1;
}

message PeerExchangeRPC {
  PeerExchangeQuery query = 1;
  PeerExchangeResponse response = 2;
}

```

The `ENR` field contains a Waku ENR as specified in [31/WAKU2-ENR](/spec/31/).

Requesters send a `PeerExchangeQuery` to a peer.
Responders SHOULD include a maximum of `numPeers` `PeerInfo` instances into a response.
Responders send a `PeerExchangeResponse` to requesters containing a list of `PeerInfo` instances, which in turn hold an ENR.

# Implementation Suggestions

## Discovery Interface

> Implementations can implement the [libp2p discovery interface](https://github.com/status-im/nim-libp2p/issues/140).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Implementations can implement the libp2p discovery interface (e.g. [nim](https://github.com/status-im/nim-libp2p/issues/140), [javascript](https://github.com/libp2p/js-libp2p-interfaces/tree/master/packages/interface-peer-discovery)).
```

---
slug: 34
title: 34/WAKU2-PEER-EXCHANGE
name: Waku v2 Peer Exchange
status: raw
category: Standards Track
tags: waku/core-protocol
editor: Daniel Kaiser <danielkaiser@status.im>
contributors:
---

# Abstract

This document specifies a simple request-response peer exchange protocol.
Responders send information about a requested number of peers.
The main purpose of this protocol is providing resource restricted devices with peers.

**Protocol identifier**: /vac/waku/peer-exchange/2.0.0-alpha1

# Background and Motivation

> Resource restricted devices may not feasibly be able to take part in distributed random sampling ambient peer discovery protocols such as [33/WAKU2-DISCV5](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/33/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It may not be feasible on resource restricted devices to take part in distributed random sampling ambient peer discovery protocols such as [33/WAKU2-DISCV5](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/33/).
```

> Resource restricted devices may not feasibly be able to take part in distributed random sampling ambient peer discovery protocols such as [33/WAKU2-DISCV5](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/33/).

Reviewer 2: Relative link are usually better `/spec/33/` as it makes it easier to migrate the website in the future (not that I expect any migration)

Author: Ill do that after applying the rest of the feedback.

Author: Done in 99e7782f1

> The Waku peer discovery protocol specified in this document allows resource restricted devices to request a list of peers from a (stronger) peer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Waku peer discovery protocol specified in this document allows resource restricted devices to request a list of peers from a service node.
```
I believe this is the terminology we want to use.

> Network parameters necessary to connect to this stronger peer can, for instance, be learned from a static bootstrapping method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Network parameters necessary to connect to this service node COULD be learned from a static bootstrapping method or using [EIP-1459: Node Discovery via DNS](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1459).
```

Just a suggestion.

> The advantage of using Waku peer exchange to discover new peers over simply adding static bootstrap peers to the peer list is a more even load distribution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The advantage of using Waku peer exchange to discover new peers over using a static list peer or dns discovery is a more even load distribution.
```

Author: I used:
`using a static peer list or DNS discovery is a more even load distribution`
e4a4728

> If a lot of (resource restricted) nodes would use static bootstrap nodes as relay or store nodes, the load on these would be very high.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a lot of (resource restricted) nodes would use the same service nodes as relay or store nodes, the load on these would be very high.
```

Heavily used static nodes also add a centralized element. Downtime of such a node might significantly impact the network.

However, the resource efficiency of this protocol comes at an anonymity cost, which is explained in the [Security/Privacy Considerations](#securityprivacy-considerations) section.
This protocol SHOULD only be used if [33/WAKU2-DISCV5](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/33/) is infeasible.

# Theory and Protocol Semantics

The peer exchange protocol specified in this document is a simple request-response protocol.
As Figure 1 illustrates, the requesting node sends a request to a peer, which acts as the responder.
The responder replies with a list of ENRs as specified in [31/WAKU2-ENR](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/31/).
The [multiaddresses](https://docs.libp2p.io/concepts/addressing/) used to connect to the respective peers can be extracted from the ENRs.

> ![Figure 1: The responder provides a list of ENRs to the requester. These ENRs contain the information necessary for connecting to the respective peers.](../../../../static/rfcs/34/protocol.svg)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Figure 1: The responder provides a list of ENRs to the requester. These ENRs contain the information necessary for connecting to the respective peers.](/rfcs/34/protocol.svg)
```
This should work.

In order to protect its anonymity, the responder MUST NOT provide peers from its actively used peer list as this opens pathways to *Neighbourhood Surveillance* attacks, as described in the
[Security/Privacy Considerations Section](#securityprivacy-considerations).
The responder SHOULD provide a set of peers that has been retrieved using ambient peer discovery methods supporting random sampling, e.g. [33/WAKU2-DISCV5](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/33/).
This both protects the responder's anonymity as well as helps distributing load.

To allow for fast responses, responders SHOULD retrieve peers unsolicited (before receiving a query)

> and maintain a queue of peers for the purpose of providing them in peer-exchange responses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and maintain a queue of peers for the purpose of providing them in peer exchange responses.
```

Responders that answer with active mesh peers are more vulnerable to a *neighbourhood surveillance* attack.
Responding with the set of active mesh peers allows a malicious requester to get into the required position more easily.
It takes away the first hurdle of the *neighbourhood surveillance* attack: The attacker knows which peers to try to connect to.
This increased vulnerability can be avoided by only responding with randomly sampled sets of peers, e.g. by requesting a random peer set via [33/WAKU2-DISCV5](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/33/).
(As stated in the [Theory and Protocol Semantics Section](#theory-and-protocol-semantics),
these peer sets SHOULD be retrieved unsolicitedly before receiving requests to achieve faster response times.)

Responders are also susceptible to amplification DoS attacks.
Requesters send a simple message request which causes responders to engage in ambient peer discovery to retrieve a new random peer set.
As a mitigation, responders MAY feature a `seen cache` for requests and only answer once per time interval.
The exchange-peer cache discussed in [Theory and Protocol Semantics Section](#theory-and-protocol-semantics) also provides mitigation.

> Still, fequent queries can tigger the refresh cycle more often. The `seen cache` MAY be used in conjunction to provide additional mitigation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Still, frequent queries can tigger the refresh cycle more often. The `seen cache` MAY be used in conjunction to provide additional mitigation.
```
